==================
MESA Collaboration
==================

Groups and Responsibilities
===========================

As the MESA developer base grows, effective collaboration becomes
increasingly important. This demands enough structure to ensure quality
and maintainability, but not so much structure as to dissuade engagement
of new developers or discourage existing ones.

The future directions that the MESA instrument takes will be primarily
driven by the interest of individual developers. The continued quality
of MESA requires that the developers feel collectively responsible for
all parts of the code and pay attention to large-scale MESA architecture
issues. Additionally, it requires that the function, quality, and
coverage of the test suite continues to grow with MESA.

**Key groups**

*MESA Users (MU*): Anyone who uses MESA for their science, education, or
software. This is the most important group.

*MESA Contributors (MC)*: Any user who wishes to share improvements to
MESA (e.g., contribute a hook/routine, make a pull request).

*MESA Developers (MD)*: These are individuals committed to improving
MESA and its infrastructure (e.g., the MESA Test Hub). Responsibilities
of developers include:

**Stewardship of test_suite cases**

Each test suite case must have at least one designated person (i.e., the
steward) who understands what capabilities it tests and is ultimately
responsible for keeping it updated as MESA evolves. Stewardship includes
answering questions regarding your test suite, ensuring (through
documentation) that people know how to use it for both research and
testing purposes, raising the alarm when your test case is struggling
(including your best diagnosis of the issue), and being ready to declare
that the test case needs modification (or deletion).

**Maintenance of each module and/or MESA capability**

Each module and/or MESA capability must have at least one developer who
is familiar with the relevant code and takes responsibility for ensuring
its quality. These developers then commit to providing feedback on
proposed changes from other developers. It is the responsibility of the
MTC to ensure that the developers collectively possess sufficient
knowledge of the MESA internals to maintain it effectively.

**Engage with the MESA user community**

-  Contribute to the process of documenting the instrument

-  Participate (when invited and possible) as a TA for MESA Summer School

-  Answer questions from MESA-Users

*MESA Technical Council (MTC)*: This is a small group of developers who
agree to commit a substantial amount of their time to provide oversight
and guidance concerning MESA architectural and technical issues. The MTC
holds the ultimate responsibility for the global health of the
Instrument. This includes development, maintainability, testing, etc.
They are responsible for ensuring regular communication between the
developers. They must maintain an awareness of ongoing MESA development
(e.g., surveying the intentions of the developers, monitoring the
development of substantial branches to avoid a branch that can't be
brought back to the trunk).

*MESA Administrative Council (MAC*): The group that works together to
ensure that all aspects of the MESA project are thriving. This includes
activities such as identifying and achieving funding, ensuring
successful MESA Summer Schools, making instrument paper decisions,
creating attractive environments and opportunities for graduate students
and postdocs to engage in MESA development, enhancing MESA's use in
education, ensuring that the usage of MESA by the astrophysics community
is appropriate and documented, and communicating individual developer
contributions to the astrophysics community so that the careers of
developers are enhanced by their engagement.

**Onboarding and offboarding processes**

These groups are not static and will change as individuals' engagement
with MESA evolves. If someone is permanently or temporarily unable to
fulfill their responsibilities, they must inform the MAC of the
situation. The MAC will reevaluate the membership of these groups on a
recurring basis. Removal from MD, MTC, and MAC can be for inactivity,
harm to the Project, or simply opting out.

Onboarding to MD is done by the MAC in consultation with the MTC and
the MD.  When a candidate developer is identified, there will be a
comment period where any MD can privately provide feedback to the MAC
about the addition to the MESA team.  Nominations and suggestions from
any MDs are welcome. Currently, the MD are Bill P., Warrick, Evan,
Earl, Lars, Matteo, Aaron, Rob, Adam, Meridith, Pablo, Josiah, Radek,
Anne, Rich, Bill W, and Frank.

As MESA's "first author", Bill is an ex-officio member of both MAC and
MTC.

Initially, the MTC has 4 members appointed by Bill Paxton. These are
Josiah, Rich, Pablo, and Rob.

Initially, the MAC will be Lars, Josiah, Rich, and Frank.
