Release checklist
=================

This is a guide on what needs to be done before a release can be made.


General steps
-------------

- Pick someone to be a release manager
- Pick a release date
- Pick a RC1 (release candidate) date which should be ~1 month before the release


Prior to generating a release
-----------------------------

- Update the ZAMS model file by running the work directory found in ``data/star_data/zams_models/create_z2m2_y28``. This may take up to a couple of hours or so. This will generate the file ``data/star_data/zams_models/zams_z2m2_y28.data``. Use the ZAMS model plotting script to verify that the HR diagram and central compositions look reasonable, and commit the new data file.
- Update figures in the docs by running the ``update_docs_figures`` script in the ``star/test_suite/`` folder. These figures should be checked to make sure they look reasonable. Currently not all test suite problems autogenerate figures. Pay special attention if the model numbers in the filenames of saved figures have changed (script will print an ERROR message) -- this indicates some commit to MESA has slightly changed the results of these problems, and currently the README.rst file needs to be manually updated with the new image filename and the test as to be re-run (e.g. ``./each_test_run -u 13``). A new release should not be made if one of the figures degrade in quality.


Removing files
--------------

Any files that should not be part of the final release should be added to the ``.gitattributes`` file.
This will prevent the file(s) or folders from appearing in the zip archive.


Documentation
-------------

- The Changelog (``docs/source/changelog.rst``) should be up-to-date.

.. note::
    At a minimum the changelog should mention options that are removed/replaced and how to convert from a previous version to the newest version.

- A release notes document should be written.

- The release branch or tag should be added to the `list of active versions on ReadTheDocs <https://readthedocs.org/projects/mesa-doc/versions/>`__.


Testing
-------

- `TestHub <https://testhub.mesastar.org/>`__ should report all tests pass for both Linux and macOS on multiple machines and with different OS versions.
- The previous SDK version should be tested.

.. note::
    If the previous SDK does not pass we can decide whether to bump the minimum SDK version or fix the issues.

- A non-SDK machine should test the test_suite.
- At least one Windows machine should get tested.
- Recalibrate test suite cases (things like ``simplex_solar_calibration`` and ``example_astero``).


Additional Testing
------------------

Additional checks that are not essential but should be done if there is time.

- Check test_memory runs and reports no memory leaks.
- Check ``MESA`` compiles with ``SHARED_LIBS=True``
- Run with FPE checking on.


Linters
-------

There are a number of linters in the ``linters`` folder. The following MUST be run before release:

- ``fix_inlists.py``: This makes sure certain options are disabled in the test suite.

- ``check_photos.py``: This makes sure the photo read/writes are in sync and is needed to ensure photos work.

.. note::
    If any thing was added or removed from a photo, remember to bump the version ``star_def_version`` in ``star_data/public/star_data_def.inc``

Other linters should be run if possible.


Making a release
----------------

Run the release script in ``MESA_DIR``. This requires ``$MESA_DIR`` to be set and takes one argument the release version (you should add the ``r`` prefix as well).
For version ``rXX.YY.Z`` this script will make a branch ``release/rXX.YY.Z`` and then it:

- Updates :file:`data/version_number`

.. note::
    :file:`data/version_number` is normally not included in a commit (it must be explicitly added via ``git add -f``. as we gitignore it. The release script will add it.).

- Updates :file:`docs/source/conf.py`
- Updates :file:`Doxyfile`

To the new version ``rXX.YY.Z``.

This script will also make a zip archive, which can be used for local testing to make sure the release builds.

.. note::
    This zip folder is not what we release. The actual zip folder is generated by GitHub, so that should be downloaded and tested as well once it has been made.
    This next part is important: to get GitHub to download the Git LFS files correctly, we have to make sure that in the `GitHub repository settings <https://github.com/MESAHub/mesa/settings>`_
    the option to ``Include Git LFS objects in archives`` is enabled. But then we need to disable it again after the release to avoid hitting our bandwidth limits.
    Since 2024, AI companies have been non-stop downloading MESA source code via GitHub, which has caused us to hit our Git LFS bandwidth limits multiple times and receive bills that are several thousand dollars.
    Hopefully this means LLMs will have a fantastic understanding of astrophysics and MESA in the future, but for now we need to be careful about our Git LFS usage.

.. note::
    Once the script has generated the new release branch, update the changelog headings from "Changes in main" to "Changes in rXX.YY.Z" etc,
    and delete the note near the top of the changelog about changes in ``main`` relative to the most recent release.

The release script does not push any changes to Github. Once you are ready to push the release branch, this must be done manually with a ``git push``. (This is a separate step from pushing the tag in the next step.)


Release steps
-------------

To make an actual release (once testing is complete), first push the git tag made by the release script:

- ``git push origin XX.YY.Z``

This is the key bit, as the GitHub release will be anchored to this tag.

.. note::
    The tag follows PEP440 standards -- there is no ``r`` or ``-`` (hyphen) in the tag (unlike the branch name) -- so readthedocs can automatically determine the stable version and add version warning banners.

Go to https://github.com/MESAHub/mesa/releases and craft a new release following the guidelines `here <https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository>`__.

.. note::
    If this is a RC release, then make sure to click ``This is a pre-release``.

Add an appropriate title and description. The title should be kept simple, like ``Release: rXX.YY.Z``.

Once created, this zip folder should be downloaded and checked that it installs and runs a test case.


Zenodo
------

Once the zip folder has been created, it should be uploaded to Zenodo prior to sending a release announcement. This helps avoid swamping our GitHub bandwidth with user downloads.

- For a pre-release, do not upload to the main MESA Zenodo repository.
  Instead upload to its own Zenodo entry. This can be done on a personal account.
  For an example, see `r25.10.1-rc1 <https://zenodo.org/records/17426065>`_.
- Official releases need to be uploaded to `this MESA Zenodo page <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2602941>`_.
- The zip uploaded to Zenodo should be larger than 2 Gb in size, and takes a few hours to upload.


Send an email to mesa-users
---------------------------

Send an email announcing the release, this should include:

- Link to Zenodo for download (not GitHub)
- A brief summary of the changes
- A link to the Changelog
- Highlight any very disruptive changes that might have occurred
- Any new mesa-developers
- Acknowledge those in the community who have helped in some way during this release (bug reports, PRs, testing during the RC phase, being very active on mesa-users)
- Remind people that we welcome any contributions (big or small)


Acknowledging support
---------------------

Getting all authors who committed code (this includes merged pull requests)

.. code-block:: console

    git log --format='%aN' 24.08.1..HEAD | sort -u


Listing all commits that acknowledge help from someone

.. code-block:: console

    git log --all --grep="-by" 24.08.1..HEAD


Post release fixes
------------------

By having the release be in a separate branch, we can push changes if we need to fix issues. However, this should be done with caution. Changes to the documentation (highlighting some workarounds are fine). Making changes to the code itself is more tricky (due to the Zenodo upload being fixed and change requiring a new Zenodo upload). It may be easier if a version
needs fixes to simply push a new release, and flag the current release as not working.


Add new release version to readthedocs
--------------------------------------

First gain access to the readthedocs account (that is currently accessible by Rich, Evan, Joey, Earl, Meridith, and Philip). Then:

- Go to the ``Versions`` page
- Find the release tag (not the branch) and ``Activate`` it
- We want the tag (following PEP440 standards), so readthedocs can automatically deduce the stable version and create a version banner warning.
- Wait for it to build, and check that it works
- Go to the ``Admin`` page and then the ``Advanced settings`` tab
- Switch the default version to the release
- Click ``save`` at the bottom of the page
- To update docs post release, we will need to use git to change the tag to point to the new commit (SHA).
