######################################################
Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA)
######################################################

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/MESAHub/mesa
    :alt: GitHub
    :target: https://github.com/MESAHub/mesa/blob/master/LICENSE
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/MESAHub/mesa
    :alt: GitHub release (latest by date)
    :target: https://github.com/MESAHub/mesa/releases/latest
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/MESAHub/mesa
    :alt: GitHub issues
    :target: https://github.com/MESAHub/mesa/issues

**WARNING**: The default ``main`` branch is the development version of
MESA and is not guaranteed to function correctly.  If you are using
MESA, you should use an official release version.

Overview
========

MESA is built to allow users to run experiments in stellar evolution. 
Stellar evolution calculations (i.e., stellar evolution tracks and
detailed information about the evolution of internal and global
properties) are a basic tool that enable a broad range of research in
astrophysics. Areas that critically depend on high-fidelity and modern
stellar evolution include asteroseismology, nuclear astrophysics,
stellar populations, chemical evolution and population synthesis,
astrobiology, binary stars, variable stars, supernovae, novae, compact
objects, tidal disruption events, stellar hydrodynamics, and stellar activity.

New observational capabilities are emerging in these fields that place
a high demand on exploration of stellar dependencies on mass,
metallicity and age. So, even though one dimensional stellar evolution
is a mature discipline, we continue to ask new questions of stars.
Some important aspects of stars are truly three-dimensional, such as
convection, rotation, and magnetism. These aspects remain in the realm
of research frontiers with evolving understanding and insights, quite
often profound. However, much remains to be gained scientifically (and
pedagogically) by accurate one-dimensional calculations, and this is
the focus of MESA.



Documentation
=============

Please visit https://docs.mesastar.org/ for up-to-date information about installing and running MESA.

The `MESA Marketplace <http://cococubed.com/mesa_market/>`__ provides resources for published papers using MESA. 
