docs/source/reference/hooks.rst, before:

.. _list-otherhooks:

Other hooks
===========

There are many hooks in star.  Code location indicates the file in
``star/private`` where the hook is called.

Equations
---------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_energy                     evolve
other_energy_implicit            hydro_eqns
other_momentum                   hydro_vars
other_momentum_implicit          hydro_vars
other_eps_grav                   eps_grav
other_gradr_factor               hydro_vars
other_opacity_factor             micro
other_cgrav                      hydro_vars
===============================  =============
   
atm
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_surface_pt                 hydro_vars
===============================  =============

eos
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_eosDT_get                  eos_support
other_eosDT_get_T
other_eosDT_get_Rho
===============================  =============

kap
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_kap_get                    kap_support
other_kap_get_op_mono            kap_support
===============================  =============

net
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_net_get                    net
set_rate_factors                 net
set_which_rates                  net
===============================  =============

neu
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_neu                        neu
===============================  =============

diffusion
---------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_diffusion                  element_diffusion
other_diffusion_factor           element_diffusion
other_diffusion_coefficients     diffusion_support
===============================  =============

rotation
--------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_torque                     solve_omega_mix
other_torque_implicit            solve_omega_mix
binary_other_torque_implicit     solve_omega_mix
other_eval_fp_ft                 hydro_rotation
other_am_mixing                  mix_info
other_j_for_adjust_j_lost        adjust_mass
===============================  =============

composition mixing
------------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_alpha_mlt                  hydro_vars
other_mlt                        mlt_info
other_d_mix                      mix_info
other_adjust_mlt_gradt_fraction  hydro_vars
other_overshooting_scheme        overshoot
other_split_mix                  solve_mix
other_after_set_mixing_info      mix_info
===============================  =============

winds and mass change
---------------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_wind                       winds
other_adjust_mdot                evolve
===============================  =============

brunt and astero
----------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_brunt                      brunt
other_brunt_smoothing            brunt
other_astero_freq_corr           astero_support
===============================  =============

pgstar
------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_pgstar_plots_info          pgstar_full
pgstar_decorator                 pgstar_support
===============================  =============

mesh
----
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
how_many_other_mesh_fcns         mesh_functions
other_mesh_fcn_data              mesh_functions
other_mesh_delta_coeff_factor    adjust_mesh_support
===============================  =============

timesteps
---------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_timestep_limit             timestep
===============================  =============

rsp
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_rsp_build_model            rsp
other_rsp_linear_analysis        rsp
===============================  =============

photos
------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_photo_read                 photo_in
other_photo_write                photo_out
===============================  =============

logs
----
=====================================  =============
Hook name                              Code Location
=====================================  =============
how_many_extra_history_columns         history
data_for_extra_history_columns         
how_many_extra_profile_columns         profile
data_for_extra_profile_columns
how_many_extra_history_header_items
data_for_extra_history_header_items
how_many_extra_profile_header_items
data_for_extra_profile_header_items
data_for_extra_binary_history_columns
=====================================  =============

initial model
-------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_build_initial_model        create_initial_model
===============================  =============

relax
-----
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
finished_relax                   relax
===============================  =============

solver
------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_after_enter_setmatrix      hydro_mtx		
other_after_struct_burn_mix	 struct_burn_mix
other_before_struct_burn_mix	 struct_burn_mix
other_solver_monitor		 star_solver
other_new_generation             evolve_support
other_set_current_to_old         evolve_support
===============================  =============

job extras
----------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
extras_startup                   run_star_support
extras_controls                  run_star_support
extras_check_model               run_star_support
extras_finish_step               run_star_support
extras_after_evolve              run_star_support
===============================  =============

Commit message:

Move other_eos hooks from star to the eos module
This removes the other_eos hooks from the star module.  In their
place, it adds new hooks to the eos module.

These hooks reproduce and extend the key functionalilty by (1)
allowing the user to replace all or part of the EOS by providing an
additional component EOS and its associated blending function
and/or (2) allowing the user to modify the results from the EOS right
before they are returned to star.

docs/source/reference/hooks.rst, after:

.. _list-otherhooks:

eos hooks
=========

For details of the eos hooks, see ``eos/other``.    Code location
indicates the file in ``eos/private`` where the hook is called.

===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_eos_frac                   eosdt_eval
other_eos_component              eosdt_eval
other_eos_results                eosdt_eval
===============================  =============


star hooks
==========

There are many hooks in star (see ``star/other``).  Code location
indicates the file in ``star/private`` where the hook is called.

Equations
---------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_energy                     evolve
other_energy_implicit            hydro_eqns
other_momentum                   hydro_vars
other_momentum_implicit          hydro_vars
other_eps_grav                   eps_grav
other_gradr_factor               hydro_vars
other_opacity_factor             micro
other_cgrav                      hydro_vars
===============================  =============
   
atm
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_surface_pt                 hydro_vars
===============================  =============

kap
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_kap_get                    kap_support
other_kap_get_op_mono            kap_support
===============================  =============

net
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_net_get                    net
set_rate_factors                 net
set_which_rates                  net
===============================  =============

neu
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_neu                        neu
===============================  =============

diffusion
---------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_diffusion                  element_diffusion
other_diffusion_factor           element_diffusion
other_diffusion_coefficients     diffusion_support
===============================  =============

rotation
--------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_torque                     solve_omega_mix
other_torque_implicit            solve_omega_mix
binary_other_torque_implicit     solve_omega_mix
other_eval_fp_ft                 hydro_rotation
other_am_mixing                  mix_info
other_j_for_adjust_j_lost        adjust_mass
===============================  =============

composition mixing
------------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_alpha_mlt                  hydro_vars
other_mlt                        mlt_info
other_d_mix                      mix_info
other_adjust_mlt_gradt_fraction  hydro_vars
other_overshooting_scheme        overshoot
other_split_mix                  solve_mix
other_after_set_mixing_info      mix_info
===============================  =============

winds and mass change
---------------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_wind                       winds
other_adjust_mdot                evolve
===============================  =============

brunt and astero
----------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_brunt                      brunt
other_brunt_smoothing            brunt
other_astero_freq_corr           astero_support
===============================  =============

pgstar
------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_pgstar_plots_info          pgstar_full
pgstar_decorator                 pgstar_support
===============================  =============

mesh
----
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
how_many_other_mesh_fcns         mesh_functions
other_mesh_fcn_data              mesh_functions
other_mesh_delta_coeff_factor    adjust_mesh_support
===============================  =============

timesteps
---------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_timestep_limit             timestep
===============================  =============

rsp
---
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_rsp_build_model            rsp
other_rsp_linear_analysis        rsp
===============================  =============

photos
------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_photo_read                 photo_in
other_photo_write                photo_out
===============================  =============

logs
----
=====================================  =============
Hook name                              Code Location
=====================================  =============
how_many_extra_history_columns         history
data_for_extra_history_columns         
how_many_extra_profile_columns         profile
data_for_extra_profile_columns
how_many_extra_history_header_items
data_for_extra_history_header_items
how_many_extra_profile_header_items
data_for_extra_profile_header_items
data_for_extra_binary_history_columns
=====================================  =============

initial model
-------------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_build_initial_model        create_initial_model
===============================  =============

relax
-----
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
finished_relax                   relax
===============================  =============

solver
------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
other_after_enter_setmatrix      hydro_mtx		
other_after_struct_burn_mix	 struct_burn_mix
other_before_struct_burn_mix	 struct_burn_mix
other_solver_monitor		 star_solver
other_new_generation             evolve_support
other_set_current_to_old         evolve_support
===============================  =============

job extras
----------
===============================  =============
Hook name                        Code Location
===============================  =============
extras_startup                   run_star_support
extras_controls                  run_star_support
extras_check_model               run_star_support
extras_finish_step               run_star_support
extras_after_evolve              run_star_support
===============================  =============
