============
Release 8118
============

:Date:   2016-02-03

Revision 8118 has been designated a MESA release version.

We call your attention to some high level items. Please consult the full
release notes, available in `this mailing list
post <https://lists.mesastar.org/pipermail/mesa-users/2016-February/006205.html>`__,
to learn more.

-  Almost all extras routines in run_star_extras and run_binary_extras
   are now implemented as hooks, in a similar way to all other_\*
   routines. If you use a custom run_star_extras, you need to slightly
   modify it for it to be compatible with this and future versions.

-  The old ``RGB_wind_scheme`` and ``AGB_wind_scheme`` have been
   replaced with temperature-dependent ``hot_wind_scheme`` and
   ``cool_wind_RGB_scheme`` and ``cool_wind_AGB_scheme``.

-  There has been a small change in how opacities are computed when
   blending Type1 and Type2 tables.

-  Several errors in the on-the-fly weak rate implementation have been
   corrected. If you have been making use of these capabilities in
   r7624, please contact Josiah Schwab (jwschwab@berkeley.edu) for more
   details.

-  MESA’s color module has now be extended. You can output either the
   raw bolometric correction(s) or the absolute magnitude(s). PGSTAR
   plots have also been added to plot magnitude-magnitude,
   color-magnitude and color-color plots.

-  A new pgstar plot “network” has been added to show total abundances
   of isotopes as a function of N vs Z and is a useful way to visualize
   the distribution of isotopes in your nuclear network.

-  We now can run the star tests with NaN traps enabled combined with
   pre-setting all dynamically allocated memory to hold NaNs. This is
   very effective at showing up accesses to uninitialized data that the
   compiler can’t catch.

A `ZIP file of this
release <http://sourceforge.net/projects/mesa/files/releases/mesa-r8118.zip/download>`__
is available for download.
