#  MESA setup for Stripped Envelope Supernova Progenitor

Developed for the [TARDIS connector workshop 2025](https://kasukabedefenceforce.github.io/tardis-con/2025) at CCA/Flatiron.

The setup template is in <./template_binary>. It computes the
evolution of a 15M<sub>☉</sub> donor star + 12M<sub>☉</sub> point-mass
companion with an initial period of 20 days through case B (post
donor-main-sequence) fully conservative mass transfer until carbon
core depletion and core-collapse.

Originally developed for [Renzo et al.
2021](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...923..277R/abstract),
[2023](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023ApJ...942L..32R/abstract),
ported to MESA `r24.03.1` or later by
[@neevshah101](https://github.com/neevshah101). The post-carbon
depletion evolution (see below) is based on a template inlist provided
by [@Debraheem](https://github.com/Debraheem). These have been
iterated upon by trial-and-error until viable models run.

Output files generated by using this setup are saved in the
run<sub>outputs</sub> dir for each directory.


# Note on evolution beyond C depletion

At carbon depletion ($X_{center}(^{12}C)_{} <0.01$, defined in
`extras_finish_step` in `run_star_extras.f90`) we read on-the-fly a
`star_job` and `controls` from an inlist whose path is **hard coded**.
This inlist lives in
[inlist<sub>to</sub><sub>cc</sub>](./template_binary/inlist_to_cc).
and it helps to reach the onset of core collapse.

As usual, most computing time is spent post-carbon depletion. This
model uses `use_drag = .true.` post-carbon depletion to successfully go
to core-collapse without spurious envelope velocities. It also uses
`op_split = .true.` for T&ge;4&times;10<sup>9</sup> K, and changes overshooting parameters
for late burning (this has been found to be necessary through a
non-systematic but extensive experimentation).


# TODO

-   test it reaches onset of core-collapse with MESA `r24.08.1`
    -   [X] 22 iso network
    -   [ ] large network (work in progress in separate folder/branches)
-   [ ] check CPUh cost: &sim; 3h on 12 cores

